       
  
Citation for published version:
Corradi, T, Hall, P & Iravani, P 2015, Bayesian tactile object recognition: learning and recognising objects using
a new inexpensive tactile sensor. in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
Proceedings / IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation., IEEE, pp. 3909-3914, IEEE
Interational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2015, Seattle, USA United States, 26/05/15.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2015.7139744
DOI:
10.1109/ICRA.2015.7139744
Publication date:
2015
Document Version
Early version, also known as pre-print
Link to publication
University of Bath
Alternative formats
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact:
openaccess@bath.ac.uk
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 28. Aug. 2026
Bayesian Tactile Object Recognition: learning and recognising objects
using a new inexpensive tactile sensor*
Tadeo Corradi1, Peter Hall2and Pejman Iravani1
Abstract — We present a Bayesian approach to tactile object
recognition that improves on state-of-the-art in using single-
touch events in two ways. First by improving recognition
accuracy from about 90% to about 95%, using about half
the number of touches. Second by reducing the number of
touches needed for training from about 200 to about 60. In
addition, we use a new tactile sensor that is less than one tenth
of the cost of widely available sensors. The paper describes
the sensor, the likelihood function used with the Naive Bayes
classiﬁer, and experiments on a set of ten real objects. We also
provide preliminary results to test our approach for its ability
to generalise to previously unencountered objects.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Bayesian system for object learning and recognition
using purely tactile, orientation independent information is
presented. A novel, inexpensive sensor is used, mounted on a
robotic arm which learns in an automatic manner to recognise
objects outperforming state-of-the-art. We also provide some
evidence that the system can recognise previously unseen
objects.
The system learns and recognises objects from single-
touch events using a newly developed sensor [1]. Tactile
sensations are encoded using Zernike Moments and objects
are modeled by a sum of Gaussian distributions. The ap-
proach presented does not use the orientation information
of the objects and requires only a very limited number of
training samples, making a substantial improvement over
previous work. A fully automated robot system (depicted in
Fig. 1) was constructed to learn the tactile appearance of 10
household objects and to recognise these with an accuracy
of 87% after 15 touches and 95% after 30 touches.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Tactile sensors
Tactile sensors can be designed using a variety of tech-
niques, the most common being piezo-resisitive sensors,
conductive polymers, or capacitive sensors [2]. The most
widely used in robotics include the impedance based BioTac
[3], the Weiss tactile array [4], and the capacitive array based
DigiTact [5], all of which have a price tag exceeding USD
700. Recently, efforts have been made at creating cheaper and
more accessible sensors. The TakkTile TakkArray [6] is an
open source and open hardware sensor based on an array of
*This work was funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Council
(EPSRC), UK
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Bath, Claverton
Down, Bath, BA27AY , UK t.m.corradi@bath.ac.uk
2Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath, BA27AY , UK
Fig. 1. The new tactile sensor mounted on a KUKA KR5-sixx-
R650 robotic arm, currently exploring the tactile appearance of a
mug.
MEMS barometers, it has a retail price of USD 500, and their
material cost is approximately USD 200. The TacTip [7] aims
to provide higher resolution whilst remaining inexpensive
as they can be non-professionally manufactured (material
cost is approximately USD 200). It is a biologically inspired
tactile sensor based on the deformation of a silicone rubber
hemispherical surface and the consequential displacement of
a number of internal papillae. A digital camera is used to
observe this displacement.
B. Recognition by grasping
Recently, there have been several projects involving recog-
nition by grasping using machine learning techniques. Prin-
cipal Component Analysis (PCA), Self Organizing Maps and
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks have been combined to process
the output of Weiss tactile sensory arrays attached to a num-
ber of robotic end-effectors, to recognize household objects
[8]. Novel recursive Gaussian kernels have been designed to
encode the various stages of contact during grasping leading
to a robust on-line system capable of learning new models
and classifying objects in real time [9]. The most accurate
system, to the best of our knowledge, is the one developed
by [10]. They extends HMP (Hierarchical Matching Pursuit,
a multi-layer hierarchical feature learning system) to include
temporal information. They test their method on 6 tactile
databases and produce an accuracy of between 80% and
100%. Whilst it is evident that combining proprioceptive
with tactile information is likely to yield better results than
either modality alone [11], [12], using grasp limits the size
of the object to be identiﬁed, requires a robotic hand, and
requires a grasp to be achieved.
C. Single contact tactile recognition
Recognition using a single touch at a time is a possible
solution which remains relatively unexplored. As far as we
know, the best results so far are achieved by [13], requiring
60 touches to converge to 90% recognition accuracy, using
200 touches for training, over a set of 5 objects.
The most common approaches for single contact tactile
object recognition are voxel based or point clouds [14], [15],
[16]. Recently, a very efﬁcient and accurate combination
of both was developed [17], which is able to model the
object shape and the uncertainty about occupied space. They
achieve above 80% accuracy in recognition over a set of
45 objects, and from only 10 touches; however, object 3D
models are required in advance. V oxel representations and
point-clouds provide a natural way of representing tactile
information about objects, but they can be cumbersome in
terms of computational power for recognition, as they usually
comprise a large number of points/voxels whose matching to
a database can be complex, and are prone to noise which
is difﬁcult to model. Attempts to address these problems
include merging points that are close into a probability point
modelled by a Kalman ﬁlter [18], and clustering to subdivide
the point cloud into regions which are then encoded as
features [19].
D. Appearance based tactile-only recognition
One of the ﬁrst attempts at a tactile-only recognition is
[20], which uses geometric features such as lines and points
and their evolution over time. Their accuracy recognising
objects is high (83%), however the number of shapes is
only 6 and they are very basic predeﬁned geometric solids
(cylinder, cone, etc.). The two notable recent pieces of
research which most closely relate to our study are the work
of Schneider et al. [21], and the work of Pezzementi et al.
[13].
The ﬁrst [21], involves the repeated application of a
two ﬁngered grasps using a gripper equipped with Weiss
tactile array sensors. Features are extracted, then a bag-of-
features approach is used to recognise household and in-
dustrial objects. They use an information theoretic approach
for maximum expected information gain to inform grasping
position. They obtain an accuracy of 84.6% in recognition,
using 830 tactile images for training and 16 to 20 tactile
images in the testing set. The object pose is strictly known
and ﬁxed (small translation variance is tolerated). It could
be argued that this work uses proprioception (they know
the height of the gripper) and thus is not purely appearance
based.
Pezzementi et al. [13] use simulations to compare var-
ious methods of feature extraction, and create clusters of
these features to compile feature histograms to be compared
for object recognition. Most of their testing is performed
in simulation using 3D models of objects. The physical
testing was done using DigitTact sensors over a set of 5objects (the context was recognition of plastic letters) using
a predeﬁned exploring routine. They use 200 samples for
training and 100 for testing. The accuracy in these physical
experiments reaches 90% for one of their feature choices
after approximately 60 touches. It would be interesting to
see this system tested on a larger set of objects, since its
simulated performance is quite good.
III. S ENSOR AND TACTILE DATA REPRESENTATION
The new sensor [1] used in this paper is based on the
same principle as the TacTip. However, it has neither papillae
nor internal gel. Instead it has a plain black smooth opaque
silicone rubber hemispherical membrane of radius 40mm
and thickness 1mm, mounted at the end of a rigid opaque
encasing for the digital camera, 3D printed in ABS1.
The camera has a resolution of 640 by 480 pixels, and
incorporates a set of 8 white LEDs. The shading pattern of
light is used as input. When the sensor is in contact with
an object, the shading pattern on the membrane changes
accordingly (see Fig. 2). In recent work, it was shown to
recognise seven basic shapes with over 95% accuracy [1].
Due to the circular geometry of the sensor image, a
rotationally invariant representation was required. In previous
work, a number of encoding methods were compared and
it was suggested that Zernike Moments together with PCA
achieved the best performance [1]. Zernike Moments have
been shown to be useful when scale, rotation and translation
invariances are sought [22], and have been successfully
used for basic shape recognition [23]. Zernike moments
here refers to the absolute value of the inner product of a
vectorised image with a vectorised Zernike polynomial, a set
of radial complex polynomials deﬁned on the unit disk (see
Fig. 3).
Letmnbe non-negative integers, and let 0
2;01deﬁne a polar coordinate system. Then the
13D model of the tactile sensor encasing, and links to the other compo-
nents are available at: https://github.com/Exhor/bathtip
Fig. 2. The new tactile sensor design (left). The main body is 3D
printed in ABS. The tip is a 1mm thick silicone rubber hemisphere.
At the base (not visible) there is a USB eSecure web-cam (running
at 640 by 480 pixels) with 8 LEDs illuminating the inside of the
silicone hemisphere. As the tip makes contact with an object, it deforms
resulting in a speciﬁc shading pattern (right).
Fig. 3. The ﬁrst Zernike polynomials evaluated on a unit disk.
Here depicted as modulus (red) and phase (blue).
even and odd Zernike polynomials are deﬁned as:
Zm
n(;') =Rm
n() cos(m')
Z m
n(;') =Rm
n() sin(m');
Which can be indexed by:
Zj=Zm(j)
n(j)
Wherem(j);n(j)are Noll’s indices of Zernike polynomials
[24], and
Rm
n() =(n m)=2X
k=0( 1)k(n k)!
k!
n+m
2 k
!
n m
2 k
!n 2k
Then, thedthZernike Moment of an image Mis given by:
Zerd(M) =X
i;j2fi2+j2n2=2gM(i;j)Z0
d(i;j)
Where,
Z0
d(i;j) :=Zj p
(i2+j2)
p
2
2n;arctanj n=2
i n=2!
Once the Zernike moments are obtained from the entire
training set, PCA is performed. The Zernike moments of
images obtained during validation/testing are multiplied by
the PCA dimensionality reduction matrix obtained during
training. This process is hereafter referred to as “ﬁnding the
Zernike-PCA moments”. The number of components to be
used is decided by inspecting the eigenvalues and retaining
sufﬁciently many principal components so as to explain 95%
of the variance in the training data.
IV. O BJECT LEARNING AND RECOGNITION
The proposed model stores the Zernike-PCA moments of
all tactile images and their corresponding object labels given
during training. During testing, the Zernike-PCA moments
of each new tactile image is compared against those stored
values, and the likelihood of the new image, given each
learnt object, is computed. This likelihood is deﬁned as the
normalized sum of nCNormal probability density functions,
wherenCis the number of training images used for object
C. Each one of these is evaluated at the sensed image’s
Zernike-PCA value, centered at one of the training points,and with covariance given by the covariance matrix of all
training points2. The process is depicted in Fig. 4.
Formally, let the training set be XC=fXC;i;i=
1;:::;n Cg, whereXC;iis the Zernike-PCA moment vector
corresponding to the ithtactile image of object C, which was
observednCtimes during training. Let Wbe the covariance
matrix ofXC. LetY=fYj;j= 1;:::;mgbe the sequence
of Zernike-PCA moments (PCA reduction is performed
using the dimensionality reduction matrix obtained from
the training data), where Yjrepresents the Zernike-PCA
moments of the jthtactile image of the object being sensed
for recognition. Then the likelihood of Yjfor a given object
classCis deﬁned as:
P(YjjC) =1
nCnCX
i=1N(YijXC;i;W) (1)
Where,
N(YijXC;i;W) =e 1
2(Yj XC;i)TW 1(Yj XC;i)
p
kWk(2)d
Here,dis the dimensionality of the feature vector. Using
this likelihood function a Naive Bayes classiﬁer was imple-
mented. This assumes that observed Zernike-PCA moments
are statically independent. Note that PCA projection here
helps to mitigate against correlations between features.
P(CjY) =mY
j=1P(YjjC)P(C)
Whereis just a normalizing constant, and P(C)can be
estimated from the number of times each object is observed
during training, which in our case forms a uniform prior
distribution. Therefore object recognition can be performed
using maximum a posteriori:
Cpred= argmax
CP(YjjC)
The computational complexity arises from Equation 1. As-
suming there are nobservations times during training, the
complexity is O(dn2)during training and O(d2n)during
testing.
V. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Two experiments were performed to test the accuracy of
the object recognition method outlined above: one to recog-
nise objects seen before within a ﬁxed collection, the other to
test generalisation to unseen objects. Both experiments were
carried out under the same setup.
A. Experimental setup
The system consisted of a 6 degrees of freedom (DOF)
KUKA KR5-sixx-R650 robotic arm, a 6 DOF force-torque
sensor mounted on its end effector, and the new tactile sensor
mounted on the force-torque sensor (see Fig. 1). The force-
torque sensor was used to detect touch events and to ensure
the safety of the robot-object interaction.
2In practice, this is the diagonal matrix of variances, since XCis the
scores matrix resulting from PCA.
Fig. 4. The recognition process: from touch to object posterior probabilities.
The initial location of the object is assumed to be known,
but its orientation is unknown. Limited unintentional pose
alteration (less than 5% of object size) does occur during
the experiments, as a consequence of contact. The aim is
to have the robotic arm move the sensor to various point
on the object surface and collect the tactile information
autonomously. Each object was manually placed and secured
in this location. The robotic arms is programmed to perform
the following exploration procedure:
1) Deﬁne a “safety hemisphere” of radius 30cm about
the assumed object centre. The hemisphere occupies
the space above the object.
2) Generate a set of random points on that hemisphere.
3) Take the sensor to the next unvisited position in the
list, facing inwards towards the centre point.
4) Move the sensor linearly inwards, until a normal force
of 75 grams is detected.
5) Record the tactile image.
6) Retract the sensor linearly away from the object back
to the imaginary sphere.
7) Back to step 3.
B. Object recognition
The objective of the ﬁrst experiment was to automatically
explore, learn and recognise objects from a set of 10 house-
hold objects (see Fig. 5): stapler, toothbrush, porridge pot,
mug, shampoo bottle, box, pen, ball, textbook, water bottle
(empty).
A total of 120 tactile images were collected for each
object. These were split into 60 for training, 30 for validation
and 30 for testing. A number of tests were attempted using
the validation data set for testing. Initially, a Naive Bayes
classiﬁer using clustering was implemented, which resulted
in approximately 70% accuracy after 30 touches, using k-
means. Alternative clustering methods were tested, but did
not improve performance. In particular Gaussian Mixture
Models seemed suitable due to the natural representation of
the likelihood function for observed data, but the parameter
estimation led to an under-determined system for such a
small data set. The ﬁnal choice of inference system is non-
parametric, and as such there is no need for a validation data
set for parameter estimation. Of the 90 samples (training andtesting) for each object, 100 different partitions (60 training
images and 30 testing images) were made, the accuracy
reported is the percentage of correct recognitions, averaged
of these 100 iterations. Fig. 6 shows the confusion matrix
after 5 and 15 touches.
After 15 touches the overall accuracy is 87% ; however,
there is still a marked (approx. 19%) confusion between the
toothbrush and the pen. These objects are very similar to
touch in many of their local patches. This confusion repre-
sents 2.7% of the inaccurate predictions after 30 touches.
There is high uncertainty about the stapler in the ﬁrst 5
touches, perhaps reﬂecting the varied tactile features of its
surface.
Fig. 7 shows the average accuracy for all objects, over 100
trials. As a comparison, best previous results (averaged over
7 trials) are shown [13]. The recognition accuracy follows a
similar pattern in all methods, however our system gains a
clear advantage from the start, and it stabilizes after about
25 touches.
C. Classifying unseen objects
In the second experiment, the potential for classiﬁcation
of previously unseen objects was preliminarily tested. The
aim was to discern if the system had potential to classify
objects that had not been used in training. Five previously
Fig. 5. The objects to be learnt and recognised.
Confusion (5 touches)stalper
t.brush
pot
mug
shampoo
box
pen
soft ball
book
bottlestalper
t.brush
pot
mug
shampoo
box
pen
soft ball
book
bottleConfusion (15 touches) stalper
t.brush
pot
mug
shampoo
box
pen
soft ball
book
bottle  stalper
t.brush
pot
mug
shampoo
box
pen
soft ball
book
bottle15%30%45%60%75%90%Fig. 6. Confusion matrices showing recognition errors for the 10
household objects, after 5 and 15 touches.
0 5 10 15 20 25 300.20.40.60.81
  
Our system
Previous best (PF)
Previous best (MNTI)
Fig. 7. Accuracy as a function of the number of touches, averaged
over 100 trials. Comparison to previous work by [13], showing
their best performing features: “Polar Fourier” (PF) and “Moment
Normalized Translation Invariant” (MNTI).
untouched objects were sensed and attempted to be classiﬁed
using the system outlined above. The objects used were: a
plastic card, a different mug, a different pen, a smaller and
harder ball, and another textbook (soft-back). This time the
full data set for the 10 known objects was used for training,
and 120 images of the unseen object were used in testing.
Fig. 8 shows the posterior probabilities of each of the known
10 objects, assigned to each of the new objects, against the
number of touches.
The plastic card is very different to any known objects and
as such causes high confusion initially. The system ﬁnally
settles for classifying it as a mug or a pot. The new pen
is initially very conﬁdently classiﬁed as a pen, but after
10 touches there is growing confusion with the pot model.
This may be due to the rounded edge of the pot having
a similar curvature to the pen. The other three objects are
on average ”correctly” classiﬁed. There is some confusion
between the mug and the pot when classifying the new mug,
which is understandable due to the similarity between the two
known objects. These preliminary results show promise that
the system may be generalisable to unseen objects, but are
modest in scale and as such not conclusive: further research
is required. It seems that objects very similar to the known
ones (new book, new ball, new mug, new pen) are classiﬁed
”correctly” very quickly, and as such the level of uncertainty
at the beginning of the exploration could be used to inform
a system that predicts new classes.
Fig. 8. Attempting to classify previously untouched objects. Posterior
distribution over the known object classes, when testing is performed on
ﬁve objects not sensed during training. Averaged over 100 trials.
D. Timings
All timings provided are for single-threaded, unoptimized,
MATLAB code, running on a Core i7-4700MQ 2.4Ghz with
8Gb DDR3-1600 RAM. Zernike moment calculation took
on an average of 3:710 3s per tactile image. Feature
dimensionality was always 21 or 22. For the ﬁrst experiment
(600 images in training), training took an average of 1:7
10 8s, and testing 8:610 4s per tactile image. For the
second experiment (1200 images in training), training took
an average of 1:710 8s, and testing 1:210 3s per
tactile image. All these timings are substantially lower than
the average time it takes the robotic arm to take a reading
(approximately 30 seconds).
VI. C ONCLUSION
A new inexpensive tactile sensor combined with an au-
tomated simple Bayesian object identity inference system
were presented. They were shown to achieve accuracy in
recognition outperforming state-of-the-art, for single contact,
local appearance based tactile object recognition. The sensor
was made open source and can has a total material cost
of approximately USD 30, substantially less than any other
commercial or open source tactile sensor available, making
it widely available to experts and hobbyists. A system was
designed to autonomously collect tactile information from a
range of household objects, using this new sensor, mounted
on a robotic arm and aided by a force-torque sensor. These
results are obtained using a very limited number of training,
validation and testing images, about a third of previous
similar work. In addition, preliminary results show potential
for unseen object classiﬁcation, yet more research is needed.
Recognition is performed in real time.
Inference is performed using a Naive Bayes classiﬁer. As
such, there is a an assumption of independence between
observed features. This assumption is potentially limiting and
a more sophisticated probabilistic model may be needed as
the number of classes grows larger.
At present, exploration takes approximately 30 seconds
per reading, 30 minutes to learn an object’s representation
and 15 minutes to recognise it with 95% conﬁdence. Whilst
attempts were made to create a reactive system, robot control
is relatively rigid. It would be interesting to explore ways
of using machine learning to make the robot control more
efﬁcient and self-adapting. Future work will also include
sensor fusion, attempting to harness the potential shown here
to complement active vision systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the Bristol Robotics Laboratory
for lending us the TacTip sensor.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Corradi, P. Hall, and P. Iravani, “Tactile Features: Recognising
Touch Sensations with a Novel and Inexpensive Tactile Sensor,” in
Advances in Autonomous Robotics Systems , ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, M. Mistry, A. Leonardis, M. Witkowski, and
C. Melhuish, Eds. Springer International Publishing, Jan. 2014, no.
8717, pp. 163–172.
[2] R. Dahiya, P. Mittendorfer, M. Valle, G. Cheng, and V . Lumelsky,
“Directions Toward Effective Utilization of Tactile Skin: A Review,”
IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 4121–4138, 2013.
[3] N. Wettels, V . J. Santos, R. S. Johansson, and G. E. Loeb, “Biomimetic
Tactile Sensor Array,” Advanced Robotics , vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 829–849,
2008.
[4] K. Weiss and H. Worn, “The working principle of resistive tactile sen-
sor cells,” in Mechatronics and Automation, 2005 IEEE International
Conference , vol. 1, 2005, pp. 471–476 V ol. 1.
[5] Pressure Proﬁle Systems, “DigiTact II.” [Online]. Available: http:
//www.pressureproﬁle.com/digitacts-sensors
[6] L. Jentoft, Y . Tenzer, D. V ogt, J. Liu, R. Wood, and R. Howe,
“Flexible, stretchable tactile arrays from MEMS barometers,” in 2013
16th International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR) , Nov.
2013, pp. 1–6.[7] C. Chorley, C. Melhuish, T. Pipe, and J. Rossiter, “Development of
a tactile sensor based on biologically inspired edge encoding,” in
International Conference on Advanced Robotics, 2009. ICAR 2009 ,
2009, pp. 1–6.
[8] S. Navarro, N. Gorges, H. Worn, J. Schill, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann,
“Haptic object recognition for multi-ﬁngered robot hands,” in 2012
IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS) , 2012, pp. 497–502.
[9] H. Soh, Y . Su, and Y . Demiris, “Online spatio-temporal Gaussian
process experts with application to tactile classiﬁcation,” in 2012
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS) , 2012, pp. 4489–4496.
[10] M. Madry, L. Bo, D. Kragic, and D. Fox, “ST-HMP: Unsupervised
spatio-temporal feature learning for tactile data,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)(to appear) , 2014.
[11] J. K. Kim, J. W. Wee, and C. H. Lee, “Sensor fusion system for
improving the recognition of 3D object,” in 2004 IEEE Conference
on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems , vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1207–1212.
[12] N. Gorges, S. Navarro, D. Go ¨ger, and H. Worn, “Haptic object
recognition using passive joints and haptic key features,” in 2010 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2010,
pp. 2349–2355.
[13] Z. Pezzementi, E. Plaku, C. Reyda, and G. Hager, “Tactile-Object
Recognition From Appearance Information,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 473–487, 2011.
[14] A. Bierbaum, K. Welke, D. Burger, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann,
“Haptic exploration for 3D shape reconstruction using ﬁve-ﬁnger
hands,” in 2007 7th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid
Robots , 2007, pp. 616–621.
[15] N. Gorges, P. Fritz, and H. W ¨orn, “Haptic Object Exploration Using
Attention Cubes,” in KI 2010: Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, R. Dillmann, J. Beyerer, U. D.
Hanebeck, and T. Schultz, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Jan.
2010, no. 6359, pp. 349–357.
[16] N. Gorges, S. Navarro, and H. Worn, “Haptic object recognition using
statistical point cloud features,” in 2011 15th International Conference
on Advanced Robotics (ICAR) , 2011, pp. 15–20.
[17] A. Aggarwal, P. Kampmann, J. Lemburg, and F. Kirchner, “Haptic Ob-
ject Recognition in Underwater and Deep-sea Environments,” Journal
of Field Robotics , Aug. 2014.
[18] M. Meier, M. Schopfer, R. Haschke, and H. Ritter, “A Probabilistic
Approach to Tactile Shape Reconstruction,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 630–635, June 2011.
[19] M. Jin, H. Gu, S. Fan, Y . Zhang, and H. Liu, “Object shape recog-
nition approach for sparse point clouds from tactile exploration,” in
2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics
(ROBIO) , Dec. 2013, pp. 558–562.
[20] R. A. Russell, “Object recognition by a ’smart’ tactile sensor,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Australian Conference on Robotics and Automation ,
2000, pp. 93–8.
[21] A. Schneider, J. Sturm, C. Stachniss, M. Reisert, H. Burkhardt, and
W. Burgard, “Object identiﬁcation with tactile sensors using bag-of-
features,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2009. IROS 2009 , 2009, pp. 243–248.
[22] A. Khotanzad and Y . H. Hong, “Invariant image recognition by Zernike
moments,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 489–497, May 1990.
[23] Q. Wu and P. Hall, “Prime Shapes in Natural Images.” British
Machine Vision Association, 2012, pp. 45.1–45.12.
[24] R. J. Noll, “Zernike polynomials and atmospheric turbulence,” Journal
of the Optical Society of America , vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 207–211, Mar.
1976.